Android 12 Proposal (#1)
RHenigan/sdl_evolution: proposals/0000-android-12-issues.md

## Motivation

Android 12 adds multiple restrictions on how apps can work in the background and access device resources. Some of the new restrictions that affect how SDL Android works are:

- Apps will no longer be able to start foreground services from the background except for in a few select cases. This will directly impact how apps are able to start their own `SdlService` implementation.

- Android 12 introduces new runtime Bluetooth permissions that will be required by the library to successfully establish a Bluetooth connection with the head unit ([`BLUETOOTH_CONNECT` and `BLUETOOTH_SCAN`](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/12/features#bluetooth-permissions)).
 

> - Apps will need to explicitly set the exported flag for any services, receivers, and activities in the manifest that have an `intent-filter`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apps will need to explicitly set the exported flag for any services, receivers, and activities that have an `intent-filter` in the manifest.
```

> # Feature name

Reviewer: We should also put the proposal name here

~~~ xml
<!--AndroidManifest.xml-->
<activity
    android:name="com.smartdevicelink.transport.USBAccessoryAttachmentActivity"
    android:exported="true" <!--New Addition-->
    android:launchMode="singleTop">
    <intent-filter>
        <action android:name="android.hardware.usb.action.USB_ACCESSORY_ATTACHED" />
    </intent-filter>
    .....
</activity>

~~~

### PendingIntent Mutable Flag

In Android 12, you must specify the mutability of each PendingIntent object that your app creates. This will impact the notifications that the `SdlRouterService` is trying to display, As we do not need to update these intents at any point we can flag them with `FLAG_IMMUTABLE`.

~~~ java
//SdlRouterService.java

> int flag = android.os.Build.VERSION.SDK_INT >= Build.VERSION_CODES.S ? PendingIntent.FLAG_IMMUTABLE : 0;
> PendingIntent pendingIntent = PendingIntent.getActivity(this, 0, intent, flag);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PendingIntent pendingIntent = PendingIntent.getActivity(this, 0, intent, PendingIntent.FLAG_IMMUTABLE);
```
Are there any cons for setting the flag to always be PendingIntent.FLAG_IMMUTABLE whether we are running on new or old Android just to make things simpler?

Author: Looks like that flag was made available in API Level 23 so we would probably have to check for that at least

~~~

> ### Service Notification Delays

Reviewer: I don't see this as a downside as it could match what we have and even be better if we dont care about the notification

### Service Notification Delays

This change would be only to make sure a notification is always displayed immediately otherwise android may choose to delay the notification up to 10 seconds. If the notification is delayed there is no risk to the user and could result in a better user experience as we can hide some of the initial `SdlRouterService` notifications while the `SdlRouterService` connects. If we choose to display the notification immediately the user experience will mirror its current implementation. For the `SdlService` it will be up to the individual app developers to implement the immediate flag.

## Impact on existing code

### Foreground Services

The `SdlRouterService` currently sends an intent out for each apps `SdlBroadcastReceiver` which notifies the apps to start the `SdlService`. If the app targets Android 12 and tries to start the `SdlService` from the background like this the app will crash. We will need to add a PendingIntent as an extra to this intent to be used by the `SdlReceiver`

> These changes will require app developers to change how they implement the `SdlReceiver.onReceive` method to check the incoming intent for a pendingIntent and send that pendingIntent with the appropriate class name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These changes will require app developers to change how they implement the `SdlReceiver.onSdlEnabled` method to check the incoming intent for a pendingIntent and send that pendingIntent with the appropriate class name.
```

This implementation will also require the `SdlService` to have the `android:exported` attribute set to `true` in the `AndroidManifest.xml`.

### Bluetooth Runtime Permissions

The bluetooth logic in the library will now require these 2 new runtime permissions. With these permissions granted there is not any issue with the bluetooth logic but we now need to account for the use cases where a user has denied permissions. Specifically without these permissions the `SdlBroadcastReceiver` will never receive Intents with the `ACL_CONNECTED` action and the `SdlRouterService` will not be able to start the `bluetoothTransport`.

### AndroidManifest Exported Flag

> These attributes were already defined where required. 

Reviewer: But the dev still needs to set to true for SdlService at least.

### PendingIntent Mutable Flag

The `SdlRouterService` will crash if the the app targets Android 12 and does not have this flag defined on the PendingIntent used for `SdlRouterService` notifications.

### Service Notification Delays

> These notifications may be delayed by Android by up to 10 seconds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These notifications may be delayed by Android by up to 10 seconds but we can modify the notification builder to display them immediately as this is the desired behaviour in some cases.
```

If we decide to use `PendingIntents` and export the `SdlService` we could also create a custom SDL `<permission>` to be used by apps as a requirement to be able to start the `SdlService` but nothing is stopping developers from listing that custom permission in their `AndroidManifest.xml`.   

### Bluetooth Runtime Permissions

In the use case of the device only being connected over USB we could try to start the `SdlRouterService` of an application that does have Bluetooth Permissions to ensure we select a `SdlRouterService` that can start the `bluetoothTransport`. The problem with this solution is when we choose to start a `SdlRouterService` that is different than the one started by the `USBAccessoryAttachmentActivity`, the `USBTransferProvider` will try to bind to the wrong `RouterService`. This will require a larger refactor of the `USBTransferProvider`.

### PendingIntent Mutable Flag

> The one case where PendingIntents were being used previously in the library we can set the flag to be `PendingIntent.FLAG_MUTABLE` but as we are handing the PendingIntent off to the notificationManager and the intent does not need to be changed at any point we should use `PendingIntent.FLAG_IMMUTABLE`.

Reviewer: I am thinking `FLAG_IMMUTABLE` is a clear winner here so I suggest removing the section

# Feature name

* Proposal: [SDL-0000](0000-android-12-issues.md)
* Author: [Robert Henigan](https://github.com/RHenigan)
* Status: **Awaiting review**
* Impacted Platforms: [Java Suite]

## Introduction

> This proposal is to address the issues that have been introduced as a result of Android 12.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal is to address the issues that have been introduced as a result of Android 12.
```
```suggestion
With almost every Android version, Google updates the OS to better distribute the device resources among the running apps to enhance the performance and optimize battery life. However, sometimes the new enhancements come with new restrictions on how apps can use the resources on the device. Android 12 is one of the major Android updates that heavily modify how apps can run in the background and use device resources. This affects how the `RouterService` starts and communicates with other SDL apps and also how the `SdlService ` for SDL apps is started. This proposal is to address the issues that have been introduced as a result of Android 12.
```

Author: Should we also mention that it affects how individual apps SdlServices are started?

Reviewer: sure. I updated my suggested change.

# Feature name

* Proposal: [SDL-0000](0000-android-12-issues.md)
* Author: [Robert Henigan](https://github.com/RHenigan)
* Status: **Awaiting review**
* Impacted Platforms: [Java Suite]

## Introduction

This proposal is to address the issues that have been introduced as a result of Android 12.

## Motivation

> Starting in Android 12 Apps will no longer be able to start foreground services from the background except for in a few select cases. This will directly impact how apps are able to start their own `SdlService` implementation.
> 
> Android 12 also introduces new runtime bluetooth permissions that will be required by the library ([`BLUETOOTH_CONNECT` and `BLUETOOTH_SCAN`](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/12/features#bluetooth-permissions)).
>  
> Apps will also need to explicitly set the exported flag for any services, receivers, and activities in the manifest that have an `intent-filter`.
> 
> PendingIntents also now require the mutability flag to be set in all cases which impacts some notifications sent by the router service.
> 
> Android 12 may sometimes choose to hide notifications from services for up to 10 seconds to allow the service time to finish. This should be fine in most cases but may be something that needs to be considered by the developer and may have some cases in the library where a notification should be displayed immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Android 12 adds multiple restrictions on how apps can work in the background and access device resources. Some of the new restrictions that affect how SDL Android works are:

- Apps will no longer be able to start foreground services from the background except for in a few select cases. This will directly impact how apps are able to start their own `SdlService` implementation.

- Android 12 introduces new runtime Bluetooth permissions that will be required by the library to successfully establish a Bluetooth connection with the head unit ([`BLUETOOTH_CONNECT` and `BLUETOOTH_SCAN`](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/12/features#bluetooth-permissions)).
 
- Apps will need to explicitly set the exported flag for any services, receivers, and activities in the manifest that have an `intent-filter`.

- `PendingIntents` now require the mutability flag to be set in all cases which impacts some notifications sent by the router service.

- Android 12 may sometimes choose to hide notifications from services for up to 10 seconds to allow short-running services to finish without interrupting the user. This is in most cases a good change. However, in some cases in the library, the notifications should be updated to be displayed immediately.
```

                Notification.Builder builder =
                        new Notification.Builder(this, SDL_NOTIFICATION_CHANNEL_ID)
                            .setContentTitle("SmartDeviceLink")
                            .setContentText("Service Running")
                            .setForegroundServiceBehavior(Notification.FOREGROUND_SERVICE_IMMEDIATE);
                notification = builder.build();
            } else {
                //Try the NotificationCompat this time in case there was a previous error
                NotificationCompat.Builder builder =
                        new NotificationCompat.Builder(this, SDL_NOTIFICATION_CHANNEL_ID)
                                .setContentTitle("SmartDeviceLink")
                                .setContentText("Service Running");

                notification = builder.build();
            }
        }
        startForeground(id, notification);
        DebugTool.logInfo(TAG, "Entered the foreground - " + System.currentTimeMillis());
    } catch (Exception e) {
        DebugTool.logError(TAG, "Unable to start service in foreground", e);
    }
}

~~~

## Potential downsides

### Foreground Services

> With the proposed solution of using PendingIntents to start the apps `SdlService` from the RouterService this creates a potential security risk as the apps `SdlService` will now be required to have the `android:exported` attribute set to true. This could expose apps to have their `SdlService` be started by apps that are not SDL certified. We could also create a custom SDL `<permission>` to be used by apps as a requirement to be able to start the `SdlService` but nothing is stoping developers from listing that custom permission in their `AndroidManifest.xml`.   

Reviewer: I think the custom permission solution should be kept in the "Alternative solutions"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `PendingIntents` to start the apps `SdlService` from the RouterService creates a potential security risk as the apps `SdlService` will now be required to have the `android:exported` attribute set to true. This could expose apps to have their `SdlService` be started by apps that are not SDL certified. We could also create a custom SDL `<permission>` to be used by apps as a requirement to be able to start the `SdlService` but nothing is stoping developers from listing that custom permission in their `AndroidManifest.xml`.   
```

### Bluetooth Runtime Permissions

> With the new runtime permissions users will have to grant bluetooth permissions to SDL enabled apps. This means that if the user denies permissions for a specific app, the app will not know when the device connects to the head unit nor will it be able to start its bluetoothTransport in the routerService. With the solutions mentioned above apps that have their permissions denied will still be able to bind to another apps RouterService and will still be able to start up a routerService for a USB connection. If there are not any apps on the device with permissions then the router service would never be started when connecting over bluetooth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new runtime permissions, users will have to grant bluetooth permissions to SDL enabled apps at runtime. This means that if the user denies permissions for a specific app, the app will not know when the device connects to the head unit over bluetooth nor will it be able to start its `bluetoothTransport ` in the RouterService. However, apps that have their bluetooth permissions denied will still be able to bind to another app's RouterService and will still be able to start up a RouterService for a USB connection only. If there are not any apps on the device with bluetooth permissions granted then the RouterService would never be started when connecting over bluetooth.
```

### AndroidManifest Exported Flag

For the `SdlReceiver` and `SdlRouterService` the android guides already directed app developers to define the `android:exported` attribute and set it to true. In these cases as well since they have `intent-filters` defined this attributes default value was true. For the `SdlService` becasue there was not necessarily an `intent-filter` the default value may have been false. As mentioned prior by adding the exported attribute set to true to the `SdlService` this may pose a risk to app developers.

> ### PendingIntent Mutable Flag

Reviewer: I dont think that is a downside. If so can that be removed?

The RouterService is the only place in the library currently that uses a PendingIntent and the PendingIntent is sent to the NotificationManager. With this being the case there is no need for the intent to be changed so we can flag this PendingIntent with the `PendingIntent.FLAG_IMMUTABLE` flag.

> ### Service Notification Delays

Reviewer: I dont think that is a downside either because it will be fixed  in the suggested implemetation

This implementation will also require the `SdlService` to have the `android:exported` attribute set to `true` in the `AndroidManifest.xml`.

### Bluetooth Runtime Permissions

The bluetooth logic in the library will now require these 2 new runtime permissions. With these permissions granted there is not any issue with the bluetooth logic but we now need to account for the use cases where a user has denied permissions. Specifically without these permissions the `BroadcastReceiver` will never receive Intents with the `ACL_CONNECTED` action and the `RouterService` will not be able to start the bluetoothTransport.

### AndroidManifest Exported Flag

These attributes were already defined where required. 

### PendingIntent Mutable Flag

The RouterService will crash if the the app targets android 12 and does not have this flag defined on the PendingIntent used for RouterService notifications.

### Service Notification Delays

These notifications may be delayed by Android by up to 10 seconds

## Alternatives considered

### Foreground Services

> Alternatives for the Foreground Service restrictions are limited. We either need to start the `SdlService` from a foreground context or the conditions need to meet one of the exceptiions listed by google. These conditions include:
> 
> * Starting the Service from an Activity.
> * Starting the Service from a user interaction with a notification
> * Requesting the user ignores battery optimizations for each SDL Application
> 
> These options would either recquire and Activity be launched for each SDL app, the user to interact with a notification for each SDL app, or for the user to choose battery optimization options for each app which then creates a situation where the user dictates if the given app will have its `SdlService` start when the RouterService conencts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatives for the Foreground Service restrictions are limited. We either need to start the `SdlService` from a foreground context or the conditions need to meet one of the exceptions listed by Google. These conditions include:

* Starting the Service from an Activity.
* Starting the Service from user interaction with a notification
* Requesting the user ignores battery optimizations for each SDL Application

These options would either require an Activity to be launched for each SDL app, the user to interact with a notification for each SDL app, or for the user to choose battery optimization options for each app which then creates a situation where the user dictates if the given app will have its `SdlService` start when the RouterService connects.
```

> ### Bluetooth Runtime Permissions

Reviewer: If there are no possible alternatives considered, I suggest removing that section

Author: These alternatives that I think are important to present considering the risk of exporting the SdlService. The SDLC should probably know these options exist but the proposed solution presents the best use case for the user.

These permissions are required to be able to receive intents withe the `ACL_CONNECTED` action in the BroadcastReceiver and to start the bluetoothTransport in the RouterService. Without these permissions we cannot know when the device connects to a device over Bluetooth nor will the RouterService be able to connect over Bluetooth.

> ### AndroidManifest Exported Flag

Reviewer: If there are no possible alternatives considered, I suggest removing that section

For the cases where this attribute is now required by Android 12. We already required developers to include this attribute.

> ### PendingIntent Mutable Flag

Reviewer: If there are no possible alternatives considered, I suggest removing that section
